.TH RDANN 1 "24 May 1999" "WFDB software 10.0" "WFDB applications"
.SH NAME
rdann \- read a WFDB annotation file
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBrdann -r \fIrecord\fB -a \fIannotator\fR [ \fIoptions\fR ... ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fIrdann\fR reads the annotation file specified by \fIrecord\fR and
\fIannotator\fR, and writes a text-format translation of it on the standard
output, one annotation per line.  The output contains (from left to
right) the time of the annotation in hours, minutes, seconds, and
milliseconds; the time of the annotation in samples; a mnemonic for
the annotation type; the annotation \fBsubtyp\fR, \fBchan\fR, and
\fBnum\fR fields; and the auxiliary information string, if any
(assumed to be a null-terminated ASCII string).
.PP
\fIOptions\fR include:
.TP
\fB-c\fI chan\fR
Print only those annotations with \fBchan\fR fields that match \fIchan\fR.
.TP
\fB-f\fI time\fR
Begin at the specified \fItime\fR.  By default, \fIrdann\fR starts at the
beginning of the record;  if modification labels are present, they are not
printed unless \fB-f 0\fR is given explicitly, however.
.TP
\fB-h\fR
Print a usage summary.
.TP
\fB-n\fI num\fR
Print only those annotations with \fBnum\fR fields that match \fInum\fR.
.TP
\fB-p\fI type\fR [ \fItype\fR ... ]
Print annotations of the specified \fItypes\fR only.  The \fItype\fR arguments
should be annotation mnemonics (e.g., \fBN\fR) as normally printed by
\fIrdann\fR in the third column.  More than one \fB-p\fR option may be used
in a single command, and each \fB-p\fR option may have more than one \fItype\fR
argument following it.  If \fItype\fR begins with ``-'', however, it must
immediately follow \fB-p\fR (standard annotation mnemonics do not begin with
``-'', but modification labels in an annotation file may define such
mnemonics).
.TP
\fB-s\fI sub\fR
Print only those annotations with \fBsubtyp\fR fields that match \fIsub\fR.
.TP
\fB-t\fI time\fR
Stop at the specified \fItime\fR.
.TP
\fB-x\fR
Use an alternate time format for output (the first three columns are the
elapsed times in seconds, in minutes, and in hours, replacing the
\fIhh:mm:ss\fR and sample number columns in the default output).
.PP
The \fB-f\fR and \fB-t\fR options may be used to select a portion
of an annotation file for printing.  Their arguments are usually given as
times in \fIhh:mm:ss\fR format;  see the description of \fIstrtim\fR in the
\fIWFDB Programmer's Guide\fR, as well as the comments below, for other
formats.
.PP
Beat numbers beginning with 0 are implicitly assigned by \fIrdann\fR to each
QRS annotation in an annotation file.  If the argument of the \fB-f\fR option
begins with `#', it is taken to be the beat number of the first QRS annotation
to be printed (any non-QRS annotations that immediately precede this annotation
are also printed).  If the argument of the \fB-t\fR option begins with `#', it
is taken as the number of QRS annotations to be processed;  note that not all
of those processed will necessarily be printed, if the \fB-p\fR option is used
to select only a subset of annotation types to be printed.  
.PP
The shell variable \fBWFDB\fR should be set and exported (see
\fIsetwfdb\fR(1)).
.SS Example
.br
	\fBrdann -a atruth -r 200 -f 0 -t 5:0 -p V\fR
.br
This command prints on the standard output all ``V'' (PVC) annotations in
the first five minutes of the \fIatruth\fR (reference annotation) file for
record 200.
.SH CD-ROM VERSIONS
The first edition of the MIT-BIH Arrhythmia Database CD-ROM, the first and
second editions of the European ST-T Database CD-ROM, and the first edition of
the MIT-BIH Polysomnographic Database CD-ROM contain versions of \fIrdann\fR
that use an older command syntax (still supported by the current version but
not described here).  Refer to \fIbin.doc\fR in the CD-ROM directory that
contains \fIrdann\fR for further information.
.SH SEE ALSO
setwfdb(1), wrann(1)
