.TH RXR 1 "11 January 2000" "WFDB software 10.0" "WFDB applications"
.SH NAME
rxr \- ANSI/AAMI-standard run-by-run annotation comparator
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBrxr -r \fIrecord\fB -a \fIreference-annotator test-annotator\fR [ \fIoptions ... \fR ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
This program implements the run-by-run comparison algorithm
described in \fITesting and Reporting Performance
Results of Ventricular Arrhythmia Detection Algorithms\fR, an AAMI
Recommended Practice (AAMI ECAR-1987).
Using options \fB-C\fR, \fB-L\fR, or \fB-S\fR, \fIrxr\fR implements
the run-by-run comparison algorithm specified by the current
American National Standard for ambulatory ECG analyzers (ANSI/AAMI
EC38:1998).  \fIrxr\fR is the reference implementation of these
algorithms, and must be used to obtain the run-by-run performance
statistics cited in EC38 in order to be in compliance with the
standard (see EC38, section 5.2.14).  The EC38 comparison algorithm
includes all of the ECAR statistics (so that both sets of requirements
are satisfied by using the EC38 algorithm), with additional statistics
on detection of runs of supraventricular ectopic beats (SVE runs).
.PP
Input to this program consists of two annotation files associated with the same
\fIrecord\fR.  One of these is designated the \fIreference\fR annotation file,
the other the \fItest\fR annotation file (called the `algorithm' annotation
file in EC38 and in ECAR).
.PP
\fIOptions\fR include:
.TP
\fB-c \fIfile\fR
Append condensed reports (ECAR Table 10 format) to \fIfile\fR.
.TP
\fB-C \fIfile\fR
As for \fB-c\fR, but report SVE run statistics also.
.TP
\fB-f \fItime\fR
Begin the comparison at the specified \fItime\fR (default: 5 minutes after the
beginning of the record).
.TP
\fB-h\fR
Print a usage summary.
.TP
\fB-l \fIfile\fR
Append line-format reports (ECAR Table 13 format) to \fIfile\fR (see below).
.TP
\fB-L \fIfile file2\fR
As for \fB-l\fR, but report SVE run statistics in \fIfile2\fR.
.TP
\fB-s \fIfile\fR
Append standard reports (ECAR Table 3 format) to \fIfile\fR.
.TP
\fB-S \fIfile\fR
As for \fB-s\fR, but report SVE run statistics also.
.TP
\fB-t \fItime\fR
Stop the comparison at the specified \fItime\fR (default: the end of the record
if it is defined, the end of the reference annotation file otherwise;  if
\fItime\fR is 0, the comparison ends when the end of either annotation file is
reached).
.TP
\fB-v\fR
Verbose mode (list all discrepancies;  see below).
.TP
\fB-w \fItime\fR
Set the \fImatch window\fR (default: 0.15 seconds;  see below).
.PP
.PP
At most one of \fB-c\fR, \fB-C\fR, \fB-l\fR, \fB-L\fR, \fB-s\fR, and \fB-S\fR
can be given as an option.  If `\fB-\fR' is given as a \fIfile\fR argument,
reports are written on the standard output.  If no options are specified,
\fIrxr\fR writes standard reports on the standard output (equivalent to using
the option \fB-s -\fR).  The output generated by selecting \fB-l\fR or
\fB-L\fR includes column headings only if a \fIfile\fR other than `\fB-\fR' is
specified, and only if the specified \fIfile\fR does not already exist.  In
this way, \fIrxr\fR can be used repeatedly to build up a line-format table for
multiple records, for further processing by \fIsumstats\fR(1).
.PP
The \fB-v\fR option specifies that each mismatch is described on the standard
output in a format similar to:
.br
    3/5(120188-121065)
.br
where the first number is the reference run length, the second is the test
run length (each of these is between 0 and 6), and the numbers in parentheses
indicate the location of the match window in sample intervals.
.PP
The shell variable \fBWFDB\fR should be set and exported (see
\fIsetwfdb\fR(1)).
.SH BUGS
.PP
Since \fIrxr\fR performs multiple passes over its input files, it cannot be
used at the end of a pipe.
.SH SEE ALSO
bxb(1), ecgeval(1), epic(1), mxm(1), setwfdb(1), sumstats(1)
.br
\fIEvaluating ECG Analyzers\fR (in the \fIWFDB Applications Guide\fR)
.br
\fITesting and Reporting Performance Results of Ventricular Arrhythmia
Detection Algorithms\fR (publication AAMI ECAR-1987)
.br
\fIAmerican National Standard ANSI/AAMI EC38:1998, Ambulatory
Electrocardiographs\fR
.br
The last two publications are available from AAMI, 3330 Washington Blvd.,
Suite 400, Arlington, VA 22201 USA (http://www.aami.org/).
.SH AUTHOR
George B. Moody (george@mit.edu)
.SH SOURCE
http://www.physionet.org/physiotools/wfdb/app/rxr.c
