.TH SETWFDB 1 "24 May 2000" "WFDB software 10.1.4" "WFDB applications"
.SH NAME
setwfdb, cshsetwfdb \- set WFDB environment variables
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB\&. setwfdb
.br
source cshsetwfdb
.br
call setwfdb\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.SS \fIsh\fR, \fIbash\fR, and \fIksh\fR shell users:
\fIsetwfdb\fR sets the shell variables \fBWFDB\fR and \fBWFDBCAL\fR to the
appropriate values to permit access to on-line ECG databases.  It must be
executed using the ``.'' as shown above.  A frequent user of the databases
will find it convenient to include an invocation of \fIsetwfdb\fR in
the \fI.profile\fR file.
.SS \fIcsh\fR and \fItcsh\fR users:
\fIcshsetwfdb\fR sets \fBWFDB\fR and \fBWFDBCAL\fR similarly for the C-shell.  It
must be executed using ``source'' as shown above.  It may be convenient to
include this command in the \fI.cshrc\fR file.
.SS MS-DOS/MS-Windows users:
\fIsetwfdb.bat\fR sets \fBWFDB\fR and \fBWFDBCAL\fR similarly for MS-DOS;  it also
sets \fBVIEWP\fR (see \fIview\fR(1)).  It may be convenient to include this
command in the \fIautoexec.bat\fR file (under MS-DOS 3.3 and later, include
the command ``call setwfdb'' within \fIautoexec.bat\fR;  under earlier
versions of MS-DOS, use ``command /c setwfdb'', or append the contents of
\fIsetwfdb.bat\fR to \fIautoexec.bat\fR).
.PP
These programs are shell scripts that must be customized
before using them for the first time on a new machine.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
\fBWFDB\fR
The database path: a list of directories that contain database files.
An empty component is taken to refer to the current directory.  All
applications built with the \fIwfdb\fR(3) library search for their
database input files in the order specified by \fBWFDB\fR.  If
\fBWFDB\fR is not set, searches are limited to the current directory.
Under UNIX, directory names are separated by colons (:), and the
format of \fBWFDB\fR is that of the Bourne shell's \fBPATH\fR variable
(see \fIsh\fR(1)).  Under MS-DOS, directory names are separated by
semicolons (;), and the format of \fBWFDB\fR is that of the MS-DOS
\fBPATH\fR variable (colons may be used following drive specifiers
within \fBWFDB\fR in this case).  The Macintosh does not support
environment variables as such; on the Macintosh, the value of
\fBWFDB\fR is defined in \fIwfdblib.h\fR (one of the WFDB library
source files, not usually included in WFDB applications), and it
contains a semicolon-delimited list of directories (folders) as under
MS-DOS, but with colons used as directory separators rather than
backslashes as under MS-DOS.  Under any environment, if the value of
\fBWFDB\fR begins with `@', the remainder of the string is taken as
the name of an ``indirect WFDB path file'' that defines the database
path in the format described above.  This feature was introduced in
WFDB library version 8.0, mainly to permit Macintosh users to modify
the WFDB path without recompiling the WFDB library, but it is also
useful under MS-DOS to avoid the 128-character limit on the length of
environment variables.  Indirect WFDB path files can be nested up to
10 levels deep.
.TP
\fBWFDBCAL\fR The name of the WFDB calibration file (see
\fIwfdbcal\fR(5)).  The usual rules for finding WFDB files by
searching the WFDB path apply to the WFDB calibration file, so the
value of \fBWFDBCAL\fR need not be an absolute path name.  The WFDB
calibration file is used by WFDB applications that need to plot
signals at standard scales, as well as by \fIcalsig\fR(1), which
can determine the baseline and gain of signals if calibration pulses
are present and if the parameters of the calibration pulses are
described in the calibration file.  If \fBWFDBCAL\fR is not set by the
user, the WFDB library uses a default WFDB calibration file
(\fIwfdbcal\fR, named in \fIwfdblib.h\fR).  If the WFDB calibration
file is not readable, programs that rely on it may not choose
appropriate scales for some types of signals.
.SH AUTHOR
George B. Moody (george@mit.edu)
.SH SOURCES
Note that these are \fItemplates\fR and will need to be customized
before use:
.br
http://www.physionet.org/physiotools/wfdb/app/setwfdb
.br
http://www.physionet.org/physiotools/wfdb/app/cshsetwfdb
.br
http://www.physionet.org/physiotools/wfdb/app/setwfdb.bat
