.TH SIGAMP 1 "24 May 2000" "WFDB software 10.1.4" "WFDB applications"
.SH NAME
sigamp \- measure signal amplitudes of a WFDB record
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBsigamp -r \fIrecord\fR [ \fIoptions\fR ... ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fIsigamp\fR measures either baseline-corrected RMS amplitudes or (for
suitably annotated ECG signals) normal QRS peak-to-peak amplitudes
for all signals of the specified \fIrecord\fR.  It makes up to 250
measurements for each signal and calculates trimmed means (by
discarding the largest and smallest 5% of the measurements and taking
the mean of the remaining 90%).
.PP
\fIOptions\fR include:
.TP
\fB-a\fI annotator\fR
Measure QRS peak-to-peak amplitudes based on normal QRS annotations from the
specified \fIannotator\fR.
.TP
\fB-d\fI dt1 dt2\fR
Set the measurement window relative to QRS annotations.  Defaults: \fIdt1\fR =
0.05 (seconds before the annotation);  \fIdt2\fR = 0.05 (seconds after the
annotation).
.TP
\fB-f\fI time\fR
Begin at the specified \fItime\fR in \fIrecord\fR (default: the beginning of
\fIrecord\fR).
.TP
\fB-h\fR
Print a usage summary.
.TP
\fB-p\fR
Print results in physical units (default: ADC units).
.TP
\fB-t\fI time\fR
Process until the specified \fItime\fR in \fIrecord\fR (default: the end of
the record).  Processing will be terminated prematurely if 250 measurements
are made before reaching the specified \fItime\fR.
.TP
\fB-v\fR
Verbose mode: print individual measurements as well as trimmed means.
.TP
\fB-w\fI dtw\fR
Set RMS amplitude measurement window.  Default: \fIdtw\fR = 1 (second).
.PP
The shell variable \fBWFDB\fR should be set and exported (see
\fIsetwfdb\fR(1)).
.SH SEE ALSO
calsig(1), setwfdb(1)
.SH AUTHOR
George B. Moody (george@mit.edu)
.SH SOURCE
http://www.physionet.org/physiotools/wfdb/app/sigamp.c
