.TH EDF2MIT 1  "31 July 2002" "WFDB 10.2.7" "WFDB Applications Guide"
.SH NAME
edf2mit \- converting from EDF to MIT format
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBedf2mit -i\fR \fIedffile\fR [ \fIoptions\fR ... ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
This program reads the specified \fIedffile\fR, an EDF (European Data Format)
file, and creates MIT-format signal and header files containing the same data.
European Data Format was originally designed for storage of polysomnograms.
.PP
Options include:
.TP
\fB-b\fR
Input is in big-endian byte order (default: little-endian).
.TP
\fB-h\fR
Print a brief usage summary.
.TP
\fB-r\fR \fIrecord\fR
Create the specified \fIrecord\fR (default: use the patient ID field from
the input file as the record name).
.TP
\fB-s\fR \fIsignal-list\fR
Copy only the signals named in the \fIsignal-list\fR (one or more input signal
numbers, separated by spaces;  default: copy all signals).  Signals are
numbered consecutively beginning with zero.  This option may be used to
re-order or duplicate signals.
.TP
\fB-v\fR
Verbose mode (print debugging output).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.PP
It may be necessary to set and export the shell variable \fBWFDB\fR (see
\fBsetwfdb\fR(1)).
.SH AVAILABILITY
This program is provided in the \fIconvert\fR directory of the WFDB Software
Package.  Run \fBmake\fR in that directory to compile and install it if it
has not been installed already.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBa2m\fR(1), \fBsnip\fR(1), \fBxform\fR(1), \fBwfdb\fR(3), \fBheader\fR(5)
.HP
Bob Kemp, Alpo Värri, Agostinho C. Rosa, Kim D. Nielsen and John Gade.
A simple format for exchange of digitized polygraphic recordings.
\fIElectroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology\fB 82\fR:391-393 (1992).
.HP
Bob Kemp's EDF web site (http://www.hsr.nl/bobkemp/edf/edf.htm).
The definitive reference on the format;  it includes the full specification of
EDF from the 1992 paper, sample EDF files, software for reading and viewing
them, FAQs, and much more.
.SH AUTHOR
George B. Moody (george@mit.edu)
.SH SOURCES
http://www.physionet.org/physiotools/wfdb/convert/edf2mit.c
