.TH RDSAMP 1 "18 February 2009" "WFDB 10.4.14" "WFDB Applications Guide"
.SH NAME
rdsamp \- read WFDB signal files
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBrdsamp -r\fR \fIrecord\fR [ \fIoptions\fR ... ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBrdsamp\fR reads signal files for the specified \fIrecord\fR and writes the
samples as decimal numbers on the standard output.  If no \fIoptions\fR are
provided, \fBrdsamp\fR starts at the beginning of the record and prints all
samples.  Each line of output contains the sample number and samples from each
signal, beginning with channel 0, separated by tabs.
.PP
\fIOptions\fR include:
.TP
\fB-f\fR \fItime\fR
Begin at the specified \fItime\fR.  By default, \fBrdsamp\fR starts at the
beginning of the record.
.TP
\fB-h\fR
Print a usage summary.
.TP
\fB-H\fR
Read the signal files in high-resolution mode (default: standard mode).
These modes are identical for ordinary records.  For multifrequency records,
the standard decimation of oversampled signals to the frame rate is suppressed
in high-resolution mode (rather, all other signals are resampled at the highest
sampling frequency).
.TP
\fB-l\fR \fIinterval\fR
Limit the amount of output to the specified time \fIinterval\fR (in standard
time format;  default: no limit).  If both \fB-l\fR and \fB-t\fR are used,
\fBrdsamp\fR stops at the earlier of the two limits.
.TP
\fB-p\fR
Print times in seconds and milliseconds, and values in physical units.  By
default, \fBrdsamp\fR prints times in sample intervals and values in A/D units.
.TP
\fB-P\fR
Same as \fB-p\fR, but yields higher precision in the sample values
(8 decimal places rather than 3).
.IP
A single character can be attached to either \fB-p\fR or \fB-P\fR to choose the
format for the printed times in the first column of output.  The choices are:
.TP
\fB-pd\fR (or \fB-Pd\fR)
Print time of day and date if known, as [hh:mm:ss DD/MM/YYYY].  The base time
and date must appear in the header file for the record;  otherwise, this format
is equivalent to "e" format (below).
.TP
\fB-pe\fR (or \fB-Pe\fR)
Print the elapsed time from the beginning of the record, as hh:mm:ss.
.TP
\fB-ph\fR (or \fB-Ph\fR)
Print the elapsed time in hours.
.TP
\fB-pm\fR (or \fB-Pm\fR)
Print the elapsed time in minutes.
.TP
\fB-ps\fR (or \fB-Ps\fR)
Print the elapsed time in seconds.  This is the default format when using
\fB-p\fR or \fB-P\fR.
.TP
\fB-pS\fR (or \fB-PS\fR)
Print the elapsed time in sample intervals.
.TP
\fB-s\fR \fIsignal-list\fR
Print only the signals named in the \fIsignal-list\fR (one or more input signal
numbers or names, separated by spaces;  default: print all signals).  This
option may be used to re-order or duplicate signals.
.TP
\fB-S\fR \fIsignal\fR
Search for the first valid sample of the specified \fIsignal\fR (a signal name
or number) at or following the time specified with \fB-f\fR (or the beginning of
the record if the \fB-f\fR option is not present), and begin printing at that
time.
.TP
\fB-t\fR \fItime\fR
Stop at the specified \fItime\fR.  By default, \fBrdsamp\fR stops at the end
of the record.
.TP
\fB-v\fR
Print column headings.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.PP
It may be necessary to set and export the shell variable \fBWFDB\fR (see
\fBsetwfdb\fR(1)).
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBrdann\fR(1), \fBsetwfdb\fR(1), \fBwrsamp\fR(1)
.SH AUTHOR
George B. Moody (george@mit.edu)
.SH SOURCE
http://www.physionet.org/physiotools/wfdb/app/rdsamp.c
