.TH SIGAMP 1 "31 July 2002" "WFDB 10.2.7" "WFDB Applications Guide"
.SH NAME
sigamp \- measure signal amplitudes of a WFDB record
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBsigamp -r\fR \fIrecord\fR [ \fIoptions\fR ... ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fRsigamp\fR measures either baseline-corrected RMS amplitudes or (for
suitably annotated ECG signals) normal QRS peak-to-peak amplitudes
for all signals of the specified \fIrecord\fR.  It makes up to 300
measurements (but see \fB-n\fR below) for each signal and calculates
trimmed means (by discarding the largest and smallest 5% of the measurements
and taking the mean of the remaining 90%).
.PP
\fIOptions\fR include:
.TP
\fB-a\fR \fIannotator\fR
Measure QRS peak-to-peak amplitudes based on normal QRS annotations from the
specified \fIannotator\fR.
.TP
\fB-d\fR \fIdt1 dt2\fR
Set the measurement window relative to QRS annotations.  Defaults: \fIdt1\fR =
0.05 (seconds before the annotation);  \fIdt2\fR = 0.05 (seconds after the
annotation).
.TP
\fB-f\fR \fItime\fR
Begin at the specified \fItime\fR in \fIrecord\fR (default: the beginning of
\fIrecord\fR).
.TP
\fB-h\fR
Print a usage summary.
.TP
\fB-n\fR \fInmax\fR
Make up to \fInmax\fR measurements on each signal (default: 300).
.TP
\fB-p\fR
Print results in physical units (default: ADC units).
.TP
\fB-t\fR \fItime\fR
Process until the specified \fItime\fR in \fIrecord\fR (default: the end of
the record).  Processing will be terminated prematurely if 250 measurements
are made before reaching the specified \fItime\fR.
.TP
\fB-v\fR
Verbose mode: print individual measurements as well as trimmed means.
.TP
\fB-w\fR \fIdtw\fR
Set RMS amplitude measurement window.  Default: \fIdtw\fR = 1 (second).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.PP
It may be necessary to set and export the shell variable \fBWFDB\fR (see
\fBsetwfdb\fR(1)).
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBcalsig\fR(1), \fBsetwfdb\fR(1)
.SH AUTHOR
George B. Moody (george@mit.edu)
.SH SOURCE
http://www.physionet.org/physiotools/wfdb/app/sigamp.c
