'\" t
.TH WVIEW 1 "1 August 2002" "WFDB 10.2.7" "WFDB Applications Guide"
.SH NAME
wview \- WFDB browser for MS Windows
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBwview\fR
.br
\fBwview\fR \fIrecord\fR
.br
\fBwview\fR \fIrecord annotator\fR
.br
\fBwview\fR \fIrecord annotator start-time\fR
.br
\fBwview\fR [\fIdrive:\fR][\fIpath\fR]\fIrecord\fB.hea\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
Note: \fBwview\fR will soon be retired in favor of \fBgtkwave\fR(1).
.PP
This program reads one or more signal files and an annotation file (if
one is available), and displays the signals with annotations on a PC
running MS Windows 3.1 (or later).  To run it, either select the
\fBwview\fR icon from the appropriate Start menu or Program Manager
group (usually `Applications'), select a WFDB `header' file (a file
named with the suffix `.hea') from Windows Explorer or File Manager,
or enter one of the \fBwview\fR command lines listed above (under
`Synopsis') in the \fBRun...\fR window of the Start menu or the
Program Manager's \fBFile\fR menu.  The first two of these methods
work only if \fBwview\fR has been installed as described below, under
`Installation'; use the \fBRun...\fR method if you have not performed
the full installation procedure.  If MS Windows is not running, you
may start it and launch \fBwview\fR from the MS-DOS prompt by
typing \fBwin wview\fR (this command may also include \fIrecord\fR,
\fIannotator\fR and \fIstart-time\fR options as shown above).  Refer
to Microsoft's \fIWindows User's Guide\fR for general information
about starting and using MS Windows.
.PP
The current version of \fBwview\fR is an alpha release.  A few of the
controls are not implemented, and appear as inactive (greyed) menu items.
In comparison with other available software for viewing annotated WFDB records,
\fBwview\fR's capabilities lie somewhere between those of \fBview\fR(1)
(for MS-DOS) and \fBwave\fR(1) (for the X Window System).  \fBwview\fR can
do anything that \fBview\fR can do, and much more, but \fBview\fR is likely
to be substantially faster than \fBwview\fR on older PCs that do not have
32-bit CPUs with numeric coprocessors and MS Windows accelerated graphics
cards.  \fBwview\fR has most of the display capabilities of \fBwave\fR with
the exception of `scope' windows, but it lacks \fBwave\fR's capabilities for
annotation editing and control of external analysis programs, as well as a
variety of less important features.
.SS Choosing Files to View
.PP
The \fBChoose Inputs\fR dialog usually appears when you start \fBwview\fR.
It allows you to select a database \fIrecord\fR to view.  If you start
\fBwview\fR using a command line, or by selecting a WFDB `header' file from the
File Manager, \fBwview\fR opens the record immediately without showing the
\fBChoose Inputs\fR dialog.  If you supply a record name but omit the annotator
name, \fBwview\fR attempts to find the reference (\fBatr\fR) annotations.
At any time, you may pop up the \fBChoose Inputs\fR dialog by selecting
\fBOpen...\fR from the \fBFile\fR menu, in order to change the record or
annotator names, or the \fIWFDB environment\fR (the \fIWFDB path\fR and the
\fIWFDB calibration file\fR).
.PP
To select sets of signals and annotations to view, fill in the \fBRecord
name:\fR field (up to 8 characters), and the \fBAnnotator name:\fR field (up to
3 characters).  Leave the \fIAnnotator name:\fR field empty if the record is
unannotated, or if you do not wish to view annotations.  Although the WFDB
environment may be changed within the \fBChoose Inputs\fR dialog, note that
the effects of any such changes are limited to the current session of the WFDB
(other WFDB applications and future \fBwview\fR sessions are unaffected).
.PP
The \fIWFDB path\fR is a list of directories that are searched when you specify
a record or annotator name.  The WFDB path is usually initialized by setting
the MS-DOS environment variable \fBWFDB\fR before starting MS Windows, using
the MS-DOS batch file \fBsetwfdb.bat\fR (see \fIsetwfdb\fR(1)).  If a WFDB
`header' file was selected (either from the File Manager or from the command
line), the optional \fIdrive:path\fR component of the file name, if present,
is inserted at the beginning of the WFDB path (but after the current directory,
if the WFDB path begins with the current directory or has not been
initialized).
.PP
The \fIWFDB calibration file\fR is a text file containing information about the
relative scales of many different types of signals (see \fBwfdbcal\fR(5)).  The
WFDB calibration file is usually specified by setting the MS-DOS environment
variable \fBWFDBCAL\fR;  as for the WFDB path, this is usually performed using
\fBsetwfdb.bat\fR before starting MS Windows.  Do not include a drive
specification or path information in the name of the WFDB calibration file
unless the file cannot be found in any of the directories named in the WFDB
path.
.SS Browsing a Record
.PP
Use the scrollbar at the bottom of the window to move in either direction
through the record.  If you click on the scrollbar arrows, the display scrolls
by 1 second at a time in the indicated direction.  Clicking in the rectangles
beside the ``thumb'' of the scrollbar scrolls the display by the width of the
window.  You may also drag the ``thumb'' to move to any desired location.
.PP
Keyboard commands can also perform these functions and others:
.br
.TS
center;
r l.
<left-arrow>	back 1 second
<right-arrow>	forward 1 second
<Page Up>	back 1 screenful
<Page Down>	forward 1 screenful
<Home>	back to beginning
<End>	forward to end
<Enter>	search forward (see below)
<backspace>	search backward (see below)
<up-arrow>	zoom in (increase time scale)
<down-arrow>	zoom out (decrease time scale)
+	increase signal amplitude
-	decrease signal amplitude
.TE
.PP
You may also enter a desired time in the \fBRecenter at\fR field of the
\fBFind\fR window (accessible from the \fBEdit\fR menu).  \fBwview\fR
redraws the display centered on the specified time.
.PP
The times shown in the lower corners of the signal window usually indicate
elapsed time from the beginning of the record in hours, minutes, and seconds
(hours are omitted if the elapsed time is less than one hour).  If the times
are shown enclosed in square brackets, they indicate the actual time of day
(and possibly the date) when the signals shown were recorded, determined by
reference to the base time and date recorded in the header file for the record.
.SS Options
.PP
Use the \fBOptions\fR menu to set display and printing options.  The \fBView
Options...\fR dialog allows you to choose display scales, turn the grid on and
off, and select options for annotation and signal display.  The \fBPrint
Options...\fR dialog is very similar, but its options apply to printed output
only.  (The \fBPrint Options...\fR dialog may also be accessed via the
\fBOptions...\fR button in the \fBPrint...\fR dialog, which may be opened from
the \fBFile\fR menu.)
.PP
Select \fBUse default scales and options\fR from \fBView Options...\fR to reset
all display options to their initial values.  In \fBPrint Options...\fR, select
\fBUse display scales and options\fR to set the printing options to match those
you have chosen for display.
.PP
If displayed or printed, the \fBgrid\fR marks 200 ms intervals horizontally,
and 0.5 mV intervals vertically.  (For signals not dimensioned in units of mV,
the WFDB calibration file specifies the scaling factor between the physical
units of the signal and mV.)  At the default scales, the grid intervals should
measure 5 mm on your screen or printed output, corresponding to the standard
ECG display scales of 25 mm/s and 10 mm/mV.  (If this is not the case, click
on \fBCalibrate...\fR and follow the instructions on-screen to make appropriate
adjustments for your hardware.)
.PP
\fBMarker bars\fR, if displayed or printed, show the exact locations of each
annotation.  Note that policies for placement of ECG annotations may vary
between records (for example, in the MIT-BIH Arrhythmia Database, QRS
annotations are placed at the R-wave peak, but in the AHA Database, these
annotations are placed at the PQ junction).
.PP
Normally, \fBwview\fR shows only the mnemonic corresponding to the primary
annotation type (the \fBanntyp\fR field) of each annotation.  Exceptions
include \fBRHYTHM\fR annotations (for which the rhythm, encoded in the
\fBaux\fR field of the annotation, is shown);  \fBNOISE\fR annotations, for
which signal quality data encoded in the \fBsubtyp\fR field are shown);  and
\fBSTCH\fR, \fBTCH\fR, and \fBNOTE\fR annotations (for which the contents of
the \fBaux\fR field are shown).  To make it easier to identify these
exceptions, \fBRHYTHM\fR annotations appear below the level of ordinary
annotations, and the others appear above the level of ordinary annotations.
The representation matches that used in the \fIMIT-BIH Arrhythmia Database
Directory\fR and other directories, which contain complete lists of the
mnemonics used in each database.
.PP
By selecting the appropriate items from \fBView Options...\fR or \fBPrint
Options...\fR, you can view or print the contents of the optional annotation
fields (\fBsubtyp\fR, \fBchan\fR, \fBnum\fR, and \fBaux\fR, shown from top to
bottom in that order if two or more are selected).  See the \fIWFDB
Programmer's Guide\fR for further information about optional annotation fields.
.PP
\fBSignal baselines\fR, if selected, are displayed or printed only for signals
for which absolute levels are significant, such as blood pressure.  Such
signals are referred to as DC-coupled signals, since they must be digitized
without being passed through high-pass filters in order to preserve absolute
levels.  In signals such as ECGs, only variations in level, rather than
absolute levels are significant.  These AC-coupled signals are high-pass
filtered before digitization, in order to remove any DC component, so that the
gain can be chosen optimally for the range of variation in the signal.  By
default, \fBsignal names\fR appear at the left margin slightly above each
signal;  deselect \fBSignal names\fR to suppress this output.  The header file
for each record specifies signal names, and which signals are DC-coupled;  see
the \fIWFDB Programmer's Guide\fR for further information.
.SS Searching for Annotations
.PP
Select \fBFind...\fR from the \fBEdit\fR menu to bring up the \fBFind\fR
dialog.  Enter an annotation mnemonic (e.g., \fBV\fR) in the \fBSearch
forward\fR or \fBSearch backward\fR field.  Click on the radio button to the
left of the chosen search direction, then click on \fBOK\fR.  \fBwview\fR
redraws the signals, centered on the next annotation of the specified type
that was not visible in the previous screenful.  If the search is unsuccessful,
the \fBFind\fR window remains visible, so that you can modify the search
criteria.
.PP
In addition to standard annotation mnemonics (listed in the \fIWFDB
Programmer's Guide\fR), you may enter signal quality strings (as displayed by
\fIwview\fR for \fBNOISE\fR annotations), or \fBaux\fR strings (as displayed
for \fBRHYTHM\fR, ST and T change, and \fBNOTE\fR annotations).  In short, you
may search for any string that \fBwview\fR uses when drawing annotations.
When specifying \fBaux\fR strings, a prefix is sufficient as a search target
(for example, ``\fB(S\fR'' matches any annotation with an \fBaux\fR string
beginning with these characters, such as ``\fB(SVTA\fR'' or ``\fB(ST0+\fR'').
.PP
To repeat a search forward, press the <enter> key;  to repeat a search
backward, press the <backspace> key.  If you use these keyboard shortcuts
without having defined a search target, <enter> behaves in the same way as
<Page Down>, and <backspace> in the same way as <Page Up> (moving to the
adjacent screenful in the appropriate direction).
.SS Printing
.PP
You can print the current contents of the main \fBwview\fR window, or any
selected segment of the current record, by selecting \fBPrint...\fR from the
\fBFile\fR menu to bring up the \fBPrint\fR dialog.  Choose the output device
from the \fBPrinter\fR list.  Select the range (time interval) to be printed
by choosing either \fBEntire Record\fR, \fBCurrent Contents of Window\fR (the
default), or \fBSegment\fR.  If you choose \fBSegment\fR, enter the times of
the beginning and end of the desired segment in the \fBFrom:\fR and \fBTo:\fR
fields.  Press \fBOK\fR to begin printing, or \fBCancel\fR to return to
\fBwview\fR without printing.
.SS Help
.PP
On-line help is available by selecting a topic from the \fBHelp\fR menu, or by
selecting any control and pressing the \fBF1\fR key.  The \fBHelp\fR menu
topics include most of the text of this \fBman\fR page.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
\fBWFDB\fR
The database path: a list of directories that contain database files.  An
empty component is taken to refer to the current directory.  All applications
built with the \fIwfdb\fR(3) library search for their database input files in
the order specified by \fBWFDB\fR.  If \fBWFDB\fR is not set, searches are
limited to the builtin WFDB path (see \fBsetwfdb\fR(3)).  Under
MS-DOS/MS-Windows, directory names are separated by semicolons (;), and the
format of \fBWFDB\fR is that of the MS-DOS \fBPATH\fR variable (colons may be
used following drive specifiers within \fBWFDB\fR in this case).
.TP
\fBWFDBCAL\fR
The name of the WFDB calibration file (see \fBwfdbcal\fR(5)), which must be in
a directory named by \fBWFDB\fR (see immediately above).  This file is used by
\fBwview\fR to determine standard scales for signals other than ECGs.  If
\fBWFDBCAL\fR is not set, the default WFDB calibration file is used (see
\fBsetwfdb\fR(3)).  If the calibration file is not readable, signals may be
drawn at incorrect scales.
.PP
After determining appropriate values for these variables, you may wish to add
commands for setting them to your \fIautoexec.bat\fR file.
.SH INSTALLATION
.PP
The current version of \fBwview\fR requires manual installation of a few
files:
.br
.TS
center;
l l.
\fIwview.exe\fR	\fBwview\fR itself, in Windows executable form
\fIwview.hlp\fR	the compressed MS Windows Help file for \fBwview\fR
\fIwfdb.dll\fR	the WFDB library, compiled as a large model MS Windows DLL
.TE
.br
All of these files should be installed in the same directory, which should be
somewhere in your \fBPATH\fR;  the main MS Windows directory (usually
\fBc:\\windows\fR) seems to be the most popular choice for commercial MS
Windows applications, and is suitable for this purpose.  Be certain that you do
not overwrite other files of the same names, however (I don't know of any
commercial applications that use these file names, but check your system to be
safe).  At this point, it is possible to start \fBwview\fR using the
command-line interface.
.PP
To install a \fIwview\fR icon in the Program Manager workspace, select (click
once on) a program group (such as `Applications').  Select \fBNew...\fR from
the Program Manager's \fBFile\fR menu, choose \fBProgram item\fR from the
\fBNew Program Object\fR dialog that appears, and click on \fBOK\fR.  The
\fBProgram Item Properties\fR dialog then appears.  Enter ``\fBWFDB
Browser\fR'' in the \fBDescription:\fR field, and the full pathname of
\fIwview.exe\fR in the \fBCommand line:\fR field, then click on \fBOK\fR.  It
is now possible to start \fBwview\fR by clicking on its icon.
.PP
Finally, open the MS Windows File Manager and choose \fBAssociate...\fR from
its \fBFile\fR menu.  Enter ``\fBhea\fR'' in the \fBFiles with extension:\fR
field, and click on \fBBrowse\fR.  Find and select \fIwview.exe\fR using the
\fBBrowse\fR dialog, and click on \fBOK\fR.  This procedure makes it possible
to start \fBwview\fR simply by double-clicking on any WFDB header (\fB.hea\fR)
file.
.SH BUGS
.PP
Probably many.  Please send your comments, suggestions, and bug reports to
the author:

George B. Moody
.br
MIT Room E25-505A
.br
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
.br
.br
Internet: george@mit.edu
.PP
A significant known bug is that only one instance of \fBwview\fR may be run
at any given time.  This is a consequence of using a large memory model DLL
(in this case, \fBwfdb.dll\fR) under MS Windows 3.1.  Fixing this bug is a very
low priority (i.e., not likely to happen soon unless it is fixed by a future
version of MS Windows).  If you are careful, it is possible to have two or
more instances running simultaneously \fIprovided that the same record (and
annotator, if any) are open in all instances\fR.  Exit cleanly by iconifying
(closing) all instances first, then quit each instance without reopening the
window.

.SH SEE ALSO
\fBpschart\fR(1) (for PostScript), \fBview\fR(1) (for MS-DOS), \fBwave\fR(1)
(for X11), \fBgtkwave\fR(1) (for MS-Windows)
.SH AUTHOR
George B. Moody (george@mit.edu)
.SH SOURCES
http://www.physionet.org/physiotools/wfdb/wview/
