{\rtf1\ansi \deff47\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f5\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Arial{\*\falt Helvetica};}{\f11\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1 Courier New{\*\falt Courier};}{\f47\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 CG Times{\*\falt Times};}}
{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;
\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\f47 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\cs15 \additive\f47\fs16\up6\lang1033 \sbasedon10 
footnote reference;}{\s16 \f47\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext16 footnote text;}{\*\cs17 \additive\super \sbasedon10 endnote reference;}}{\info{\author sdfgsdfg}{\operator sdfgsdfg}{\creatim\yr1991\mo10\dy6\hr19\min41}{\revtim\yr1991\mo10\dy6\hr20\min35}{\version1}
{\edmins0}{\nofpages0}{\nofwords0}{\nofchars0}{\vern49197}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0\headery709\footery709\colsx709\endnhere {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2
\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang
{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \keepn \f47 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16 \f47\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #} Help_Contents}${\footnote \pard\plain \s16 \f47\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 $} WVIEW Help}}{\b\f5\fs28  WVIEW Help
\par }\pard 
\par {\f5\uldb Choosing Files to View}{\v Choosing_Topic}{\f5\uldb 
\par Browsing a Record}{\v Browsing_Topic}{\f5\uldb 
\par Options}{\v Options_Topic}{\f5\uldb 
\par Searching for Annotations}{\v Searching_Topic}{\f5\uldb 
\par Printing}{\v Printing_Topic}{\f5\uldb 
\par 
\par }\pard \qj {\f5\fs20 This is an alpha release of WVIEW.  A number of the controls are not yet implemented, but what is already implemented encompasses the functionality of the MS-DOS}{\f11\fs20  }{\b\f11\fs20 view }{\f5\fs20 
program, with many additional features.   Please send your comments, suggestions, and bug reports to the author:
\par }{\fs20 
\par }{\f5\fs20 \tab George B. Moody
\par \tab MIT Room E25-505A
\par \tab Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
\par 
\par \tab e-mail: }{\b\f11\fs20 george@mit.edu
\par }{\f11\fs20 
\par }{\f5\fs20 You may download the most recent version of WVIEW from our World Wide Web site (}{\b\f11\fs20 http://ecg.mit.edu/}{\f5\fs20 
).  Please refer anyone interested in obtaining a free copy of WVIEW to our web site, or to the author at the address above.}{\v MacroDemonstration_Topic}{\f5\uldb 
\par }\pard \keepn \page {\cs15\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16 \f47\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #} Choosing_Topic}} {\cs15\fs16\up6 ${\footnote \pard\plain \s16 \f47\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 $} Choosing Files to View}} {\cs15\fs16\up6 +{\footnote \pard\plain \s16 
\f47\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 +} Major_Topics:005}} {\b\f5\fs28 Choosing Files to View
\par }\pard 
\par \pard \qj {\f5\fs20 The }{\b\f5\fs20 Choose Inputs }{\f5\fs20 dialog usually appears when you start WVIEW.  It allows you to select a WFDB }{\f5\fs20\ul record}{\v WFDB_record}{\f5\fs20 
 to view.  If you start WVIEW using a command line (for example, by choosing }{\b\f5\fs20 Run...}{\f5\fs20  from the Windows }{\b\f5\fs20 Start}{\f5\fs20  menu), you may supply a }{\f5\fs20\ul record name}{\v WFDB_record_name}{\f5\fs20 
 and an }{\f5\fs20\ul annotator name}{\v WFDB_annotator_name}{\f5\fs20  on the command line following the name of the program (}{\b\f11\fs20 wview}{\f5\fs20 
);  in this case, WVIEW opens the record immediately (if it is available) without showing the }{\b\f5\fs20 Choose Inputs }{\f5\fs20 dialog. If you supply a record name but omit the annotator name, WVIEW attempts to find the reference (}{
\b\f11\fs20 atr}{\f5\fs20 ) annotations.  At any time, you may pop up the }{\b\f5\fs20 Choose Inputs }{\f5\fs20 dialog by selecting }{\b\f5\fs20 Open...}{\f5\fs20  from the }{\b\f5\fs20 File}{\f5\fs20 
 menu, in order to change the record or annotator names, or the }{\f5\fs20\ul WFDB environment}{\v WFDB_environment}{\f5\fs20\ul .}{\f5\fs20 
\par 
\par To select sets of signals and annotations to view, fill in the }{\b\f5\fs20 Record name:}{\f5\fs20  field (up to 8 characters), and the }{\b\f5\fs20 Annotator name:}{\f5\fs20  field (up to 3 characters).  Leave the }{\b\f5\fs20 Annotator name: }{\f5\fs20 
field empty if the record is unannotated, or if you do not wish to view annotations.  Although the WFDB environment may be changed within the }{\b\f5\fs20 Choose Inputs }{\f5\fs20 
dialog, note that the effects of any such changes are limited to the current session of WVIEW (other WFDB applications and future WVIEW sessions are unaffected).
\par 
\par The }{\f5\fs20\ul WFDB path}{\v WFDB_path}{\f5\fs20  is a list of directories that are searched when you specify a record or annotator name.
\par }\pard {\f5\fs20 
\par }\pard \qj {\f5\fs20 The }{\f5\fs20\ul WFDB calibration file}{\v WFDB_calibration_file}{\f5\fs20  is a text file containing information about the relative scales of many different types of signals.}{\f5 
\par }\pard \keepn \page {\cs15\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16 \f47\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #} Browsing_Topic}} {\cs15\fs16\up6 ${\footnote \pard\plain \s16 \f47\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 $} Browsing a Record}} {\cs15\fs16\up6 +{\footnote \pard\plain \s16 
\f47\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 +} Major_Topics:010}} {\b\f5\fs28 Browsing a Record
\par }\pard \qj {\f5\fs20 
\par Use the scrollbar at the bottom of the window to move in either direction through the record.  If you click on the scrollbar arrows, the display scrolls by 1 second at a time in the indicated direction.  Clicking in the rectangles beside the "thumb" of th
e scrollbar scrolls the display by the width of the window.  You may also drag the "thumb" to move to any desired location;  while doing so, the time corresponding to the current position of the \ldblquote thumb\rdblquote 
 appears in red near the bottom of the window.
\par 
\par Keyboard commands can also perform these functions and others:
\par 
\par }\trowd \trgaph108\trleft1332 \cellx3204\cellx6372 \pard \qj\intbl\box\brdrs\brdrw15\brsp20 {\f5\fs20 <left-arrow>\cell back 1 second\cell }\pard \intbl {\f5\fs20 \row }\trowd \trgaph108\trleft1332 \cellx3204\cellx6372 \pard \qj\intbl\box
\brdrs\brdrw15\brsp20 {\f5\fs20 <right-arrow>\cell forward 1 second\cell }\pard \intbl {\f5\fs20 \row }\pard \qj\intbl\box\brdrs\brdrw15\brsp20 {\f5\fs20 <Page Up>\cell back 1 screenful\cell }\pard \intbl {\f5\fs20 \row }\pard \qj\intbl\box
\brdrs\brdrw15\brsp20 {\f5\fs20 <Page Down>\cell forward 1 screenful\cell }\pard \intbl {\f5\fs20 \row }\pard \qj\intbl\box\brdrs\brdrw15\brsp20 {\f5\fs20 <Home>\cell back to beginning \cell }\pard \intbl {\f5\fs20 \row }\pard \qj\intbl\box
\brdrs\brdrw15\brsp20 {\f5\fs20 <End>\cell forward to end\cell }\pard \intbl {\f5\fs20 \row }\pard \qj\intbl\box\brdrs\brdrw15\brsp20 {\f5\fs20 <Enter>\cell }{\f5\fs20\uldb search forward}{\v Searching_Topic}{\f5\fs20 \cell }\pard \intbl {\f5\fs20 \row 
}\pard \qj\intbl\box\brdrs\brdrw15\brsp20 {\f5\fs20 <backspace>\cell }{\f5\fs20\uldb search backward}{\v Searching_Topic}{\f5\fs20 \cell }\pard \intbl {\f5\fs20 \row }\pard \qj\intbl\box\brdrs\brdrw15\brsp20 {\f5\fs20 <up-arrow>\cell 
zoom in (increase time scale)\cell }\pard \intbl {\f5\fs20 \row }\pard \qj\intbl\box\brdrs\brdrw15\brsp20 {\f5\fs20 <down-arrow>\cell zoom out (decrease time scale)\cell }\pard \intbl {\f5\fs20 \row }\pard \qj\intbl\box\brdrs\brdrw15\brsp20 {\f5\fs20 
            +\cell increase signal amplitude\cell }\pard \intbl {\f5\fs20 \row }\trowd \trgaph108\trleft1332 \cellx3204\cellx6372 \pard \qj\intbl\box\brdrs\brdrw15\brsp20 {\f5\fs20             -\cell decrease signal amplitude\cell }\pard \intbl {\f5\fs20 
\row }\pard \qj {\f5\fs20 
\par You may also enter a desired time in the }{\b\f5\fs20 Recenter at }{\f5\fs20 field of the }{\b\f5\fs20 Find}{\f5\fs20  window (accessible from the }{\b\f5\fs20 Edit }{\f5\fs20 menu).   WVIEW redraws the display centered on the specified time.

\par 
\par The times shown in the lower corners of the signal window usually indicate elapsed time from the beg
inning of the record in hours, minutes, and seconds (hours are omitted if the elapsed time is  less than one hour).  If the times are shown enclosed in square brackets, they indicate the actual time of day (and possibly the date) when the signals shown we
re recorded, determined by reference to the base time and date recorded in the header file for the record.
\par 
\par }\pard \keepn \page {\cs15\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16 \f47\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #} Options_Topic}} {\cs15\fs16\up6 ${\footnote \pard\plain \s16 \f47\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 $} Options}} {\cs15\fs16\up6 +{\footnote \pard\plain \s16 \f47\fs20 {
\cs15\fs16\up6 +} Major_Topics:015}} {\b\f5\fs28 Options
\par }\pard \qj {\f5\fs20 
\par Use the }{\b\f5\fs20 Options}{\f5\fs20  menu to set display and printing options.  The }{\b\f5\fs20 View Options...}{\f5\fs20 
 dialog allows you to choose display scales, turn the grid on and off, and select options for annotation and signal display.  The }{\b\f5\fs20 Print Options...}{\f5\fs20  dialog is very similar, but its options apply to printed output only.  (The }{
\b\f5\fs20 Print Options... }{\f5\fs20 dialog may also be accessed via the }{\b\f5\fs20 Options...}{\f5\fs20  button in the }{\b\f5\fs20\uldb Print...}{\v Printing_Topic}{\f5\fs20  dialog, which may be opened from the }{\b\f5\fs20 File}{\f5\fs20  menu.)

\par 
\par Select }{\b\f5\fs20 Use default scales and options}{\f5\fs20  from }{\b\f5\fs20 View Options...}{\f5\fs20  to reset all display options to their initial values.  In }{\b\f5\fs20 Print Options...}{\f5\fs20 , select }{\b\f5\fs20 
Use display scales and options}{\f5\fs20  to set the printing options to match those you have chosen for display.
\par }\pard 
\par \pard \qj {\f5\fs20 If displayed or printed, the }{\b\f5\fs20 grid }{\f5\fs20 marks 200 ms intervals horizontally, and 0.5 mV intervals vertically.  (For signals not dimensioned in units of mV, the }{\f5\fs20\ul WFDB calibration file}{\v WFDB_calibration_file
}{\f5\fs20  specifies the scaling factor between the physical units of the signal and mV.)  At the default scales, the grid intervals should measure 5 mm on your screen or printed output, corresponding to the standard ECG d
isplay scales of 25 mm/s and 10 mm/mV.  (If this is not the case, click on }{\b\f5\fs20 Calibrate...}{\f5\fs20  and follow the instructions on-screen to make appropriate adjustments for your hardware.)
\par 
\par }{\b\f5\fs20 Marker bars}{\f5\fs20 
, if displayed or printed, show the exact locations of each annotation.  Note that policies for placement of ECG annotations may vary between records (for example, in the MIT-BIH Arrhythmia Database,  QRS annotations are placed at the R-wave peak,  but in
 the AHA Database, these annotations are placed at the PQ junction).
\par 
\par Normally, WVIEW shows only the mnemonic corresponding to  the primary annotation type (the }{\b\f11\fs20 anntyp}{\f5\fs20  field) of each annotation.  Exceptions include }{\b\f11\fs20 RHYTHM}{\f5\fs20 
 annotations (for which the rhythm, encoded in the }{\b\f11\fs20 aux}{\f5\fs20  field of the annotation, is shown);  }{\b\f11\fs20 LINK}{\f5\fs20  annotations (for which descriptive data encoded in the }{\b\f11\fs20 aux}{\f5\fs20  field are shown);}{
\b\f11\fs20  NOISE }{\f5\fs20 annotations (for which signal quality data encoded in the }{\b\f11\fs20 subtyp }{\f5\fs20 field is shown);  and }{\b\f11\fs20 STCH}{\f5\fs20 ,}{\b\f11\fs20  TCH}{\f5\fs20 , and}{\b\f11\fs20  NOTE}{\f5\fs20 
 annotations (for which the contents of the }{\b\f11\fs20 aux }{\f5\fs20 field are shown).  To make it easier to identify these exceptions, }{\b\f11\fs20 RHYTHM }{\f5\fs20 
annotations appear below the level of ordinary annotations, and the others appear above the level of ordinary annotations.  The representation matches that used in the }{\i\f5\fs20 MIT-BIH Arrhythmia Database Directory}{\f5\fs20 
 and other directories, which contain complete lists of the mnemonics used in each database.
\par 
\par By selecting the appropriate items from }{\b\f5\fs20 View options... }{\f5\fs20 or }{\b\f5\fs20 Print options...}{\f5\fs20 , you can view or print the contents of the optional annotation fields (}{\b\f11\fs20 subtyp}{\f5\fs20 ,}{\b\f11\fs20  chan}{
\f5\fs20 ,}{\b\f11\fs20  num}{\f5\fs20 , and }{\b\f11\fs20 aux}{\f5\fs20 , shown from top to bottom in that order if more than one is selected).  See the }{\i\f5\fs20 ECG Database Programmer's Guide }{\f5\fs20 
for further information about optional annotation fields.
\par 
\par }{\b\f5\fs20 Signal baselines}{\i\f5\fs20 , }{\f5\fs20 
if selected, are displayed or printed only for signals for which absolute levels are significant, such as blood pressure.  Such signals are referred to as DC-coupled signals, since they must be digitized without being passed through high-pass filters in o
rder to preserve absolute levels.
  In signals such as ECGs, only variations in level, rather than absolute levels, are significant.  These AC-coupled signals are high-pass filtered before digitization, in order to remove any DC component, so that the gain can be chosen optimally for the 
range of variation in the signal.  By default, }{\b\f5\fs20 signal names }{\f5\fs20 appear at the left margin slightly above each signal;  deselect }{\b\f5\fs20 Signal names}{\f5\fs20  to suppress this output.  The }{\f5\fs20\ul header file}{\v 
WFDB_header_file}{\f5\fs20  for each record specifies signal names, and which signals are DC-coupled;  see the }{\i\f5\fs20 ECG Database Programmer's Guide }{\f5\fs20 for further information.
\par 
\par If the time of the beginning of the record is specified in its header file, WVIEW can display }{\b\f5\fs20 absolute times}{\f5\fs20 
 at the lower left and right corners of the window.  By default, WVIEW displays elapsed times from the beginning of the record;  check }{\b\f5\fs20 Absolute time}{\f5\fs20 
 if you prefer to see absolute times (and dates) when looking at records for which this information is available.}
\par \pard \keepn \page {\cs15\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16 \f47\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #} Searching_Topic}} {\cs15\fs16\up6 ${\footnote \pard\plain \s16\sb240 \f47\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 $} Searching for Annotations}} {\cs15\fs16\up6 +{\footnote 
\pard\plain \s16 \f47\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 +} Major_Topics:020}} {\b\f5\fs28 Searching for Annotations
\par }\pard \qj {\f5\fs20 Select }{\b\f5\fs20 Find...}{\f5\fs20  from the }{\b\f5\fs20 Edit }{\f5\fs20 menu to bring up the }{\b\f5\fs20 Find }{\f5\fs20 dialog.   Enter an annotation mnemonic (e.g., }{\b\f5\fs20 V}{\f5\fs20 ) in the }{\b\f5\fs20 
Search forward }{\f5\fs20 or }{\b\f5\fs20 Search backward}{\f5\fs20  field.  Click on the radio button to the left of the chosen search direction, then click on }{\b\f5\fs20 OK}{\f5\fs20 
.  WVIEW redraws the signals, centered on the next annotation of the specified type that was not visible in the previous screenful.  If the search is unsuccessful, the }{\b\f5\fs20 Find}{\f5\fs20  window remains visible, so that you can
 modify the search criteria.
\par 
\par In addition to standard annotation mnemonics (listed in the }{\i\f5\fs20 ECG Database Programmer's Guide}{\f5\fs20 ), you may enter signal quality strings (as displayed by WVIEW for }{\b\f11\fs20 NOISE}{\f5\fs20  annotations), or }{\b\f11\fs20 
aux}{\f5\fs20  strings (as displayed for }{\b\f11\fs20 RHYTHM}{\f5\fs20 , ST and T change, and }{\b\f11\fs20 NOTE}{\f5\fs20  annotations).  In short, you may search for any string that WVIEW uses when drawing annotations.  When specifying }{
\b\f11\fs20 aux}{\f5\fs20  strings, a prefix is sufficient as a search target (for example, "}{\b\f11\fs20 (S}{\f5\fs20 " matches any annotation with an }{\b\f11\fs20 aux}{\f5\fs20  string beginning with these characters, such as "}{\b\f11\fs20 (SVTA}{
\f5\fs20 " or "}{\b\f11\fs20 (ST0+}{\f5\fs20 ").
\par 
\par To repeat a search forward, press the <enter> key;  to repeat a search backward, press the <backspace> key.  If you use these keyboard shortcuts without having defined a search target, <enter> behaves in the same way as <Page Down>, and <backspace> in the
 same way as <Page Up> (moving to the adjacent screenful in the appropriate direction).}
\par \pard \keepn \page {\cs15\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16 \f47\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #} Printing_Topic}} {\cs15\fs16\up6 ${\footnote \pard\plain \s16\sb240 \f47\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 $} Printing}} {\cs15\fs16\up6 +{\footnote \pard\plain \s16 
\f47\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 +} Major_Topics:025}} {\b\f5\fs28 Printing
\par }\pard \qj {\f5\fs20 You can print the current contents of the WVIEW window or any selected segment of the current record by selecting }{\b\f5\fs20 Print...}{\f5\fs20  from the }{\b\f5\fs20 File }{\f5\fs20 menu to bring up the }{\b\f5\fs20 
Print }{\f5\fs20 dialog.  Choose the output device from the }{\b\f5\fs20 Printer}{\f5\fs20  list.  Select the range (time interval) to be printed by choosing either }{\b\f5\fs20 Entire Record}{\f5\fs20 , }{\b\f5\fs20 Current Contents of Window}{\f5\fs20 
 (the default)}{\b\f5\fs20 , }{\f5\fs20 or }{\b\f5\fs20 Segment}{\f5\fs20 .  If you choose }{\b\f5\fs20 Segment}{\f5\fs20 , enter the times of the beginning and end of the desired segment in the }{\b\f5\fs20 From:}{\f5\fs20  and }{\b\f5\fs20 To:}{
\f5\fs20  fields.   Press }{\b\f5\fs20 OK}{\f5\fs20  to begin printing, or }{\b\f5\fs20 Cancel}{\f5\fs20  to return to WVIEW without printing.
\par 
\par The }{\b\f5\fs20 Setup...}{\f5\fs20  button opens the printer-specific setup dialog for the selected printer.  The }{\b\f5\fs20 Options... }{\f5\fs20 button opens the }{\b\f5\fs20\uldb Print Options}{\b\v\f5\fs20\uldb Options_Topic}{\f5\fs20 
 dialog (also accessible via the }{\b\f5\fs20 Options}{\f5\fs20  menu), which allows you to select scales and grid, annotation, and signal printing options.  By default, these match the current display scales and options.  
\par 
\par Although your }{\b\f5\fs20 Printer}{\f5\fs20  selection is retained for the current session of WVIEW, changing it does not
 change the Windows default printer, which is the initial printer selection whenever a new WVIEW session begins.  To choose a different Windows default printer, use the Printer applet in the Windows Control Panel.}
\par \pard \page {\cs15\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16 \f47\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #}{\lang1024  WFDB_annotator_name}}}{\i\f5\fs20 Annotator name: }{\f5\fs20 
 A string (of up to 3 characters under MS-DOS) that identifies a set of annotations (labels) associated with a given record.  Annotator names vary, but most standard databases include reference annotation files with the annotator name }{\b\f11\fs20 atr}{
\f5\fs20  (a shortened form of }{\b\f11\fs20 atruth}{\f5\fs20  , as these files are named on UNIX and most other operating systems).  To get a list of available annotators for a given record, find files matching the pattern }{\b\i\f5\fs20 record.*}{
\f5\fs20  (in any of the directories named in the }{\f5\fs20\ul WFDB path}{\v WFDB_path}{\f5\fs20 , where }{\b\i\f5\fs20 record}{\f5\fs20  is the }{\f5\fs20\ul record name}{\v WFDB_record_name}{\f5\fs20 );  the suffix of the name (omitting the "}{\b\i\f5\fs20 
record.}{\f5\fs20 ") of each such file may be an annotator name.  Note that files with }{\b\f11\fs20 dat }{\f5\fs20 or }{\b\f11\fs20 hea }{\f5\fs20 suffixes are not annotation files;  there may be other non-annotation files associated with records 
as well.}
\par \page {\cs15\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16 \f47\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #}{\lang1024  WFDB_calibration_file}}}{\i\f5\fs20 WFDB calibration file:}{\f5\fs20 
 A text file containing specifications for customary plotting scales and calibration pulses of many different types of signals.  If the record you wish to view contains signals other than ECGs, make sure that the WFDB calibration file is available to the WFDB
 Browser, by setting the MS-DOS environment variable }{\b\f11\fs20 WFDBCAL}{\f5\fs20  to the name of the WFDB calibration file (or by filling in the corresponding field in the } {\b\f5\fs20 Choose Inputs }{\f5\fs20 dialog).  Include the drive letter and dir
ectory name in the value of }{\b\f11\fs20 WFDBCAL}{\f5\fs20  only if the file is not in one of the directories named in the WFDB path.  A sample WFDB calibration  file (called }{\b\f11\fs20 wfdbcal}{\f5\fs20 
) is provided with WVIEW.  Unless a non-standard configuration was chosen during installation, }{\b\f11\fs20 setwfdb.bat}{\f5\fs20  sets }{\b\f11\fs20 WFDBCAL}{\b\f5\fs20  }{\f5\fs20 appropriately.  See the }{\i\f5\fs20 
WFDB Applications Guide }{\f5\fs20 for further information about the WFDB calibration file.}
\par \page {\cs15\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16 \f47\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #}{\lang1024  WFDB_environment}}}{\i\f5\fs20 WFDB environment: }{\f5\fs20 
A set of MS-DOS environment variables shared by WVIEW and other applications built using the WFDB library.  The WFDB environment should generally be initialized before starting Windows, typically using the batch file }{\b\f11\fs20 setwfdb.bat}{
\f5\fs20  (installed together with WVIEW, and often invoked automatically from }{\b\f11\fs20 autoexec.bat}{\f5\fs20  whenever your system is rebooted).  The WFDB environment consists of the }{\f5\fs20\ul WFDB path}{\v WFDB_path}{\f5\fs20  and the }{
\f5\fs20\ul WFDB calibration file.}{\v WFDB_calibration_file}
\par \page {\cs15\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16 \f47\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #}{\lang1024  WFDB_path}}}{\i\f5\fs20 WFDB path:}{\f5\fs20  A list of directories where WFDB files (}{\f5\fs20\ul signal files}{\v WFDB_signal_file}{\f5\fs20 , }{\f5\fs20\ul 
annotation files}{\v WFDB_annotation_file}{\f5\fs20 , and }{\f5\fs20\ul header files}{\v WFDB_header_file}{\f5\fs20 ) may be found.  You may initialize the WFDB path before starting Windows, by setting the MS-DOS environment variable }{\b\f11\fs20 WFDB}{\f5\fs20 
, either using }{\b\f11\fs20 setwfdb.bat}{\f5\fs20 , or a command of the form:
\par }{\f11\fs20     }{\b\f11\fs20 set WFDB=;c:\\database;d:\\mitdb
\par }{\f5\fs20 where the value assigned contains the list of directories to be searched, with semicolons (}{\b\f11\fs20 ;}{\f5\fs20 ) used to separate pairs of directories. In the example, the initial semic
olon specifies that the current directory (represented by an empty string) is to be searched first.  See the }{\i\f5\fs20 ECG Database Programmer's Guide}{\f5\fs20  for further information about the WFDB path.}
\par \page {\cs15\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16 \f47\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #}{\lang1024  WFDB_header_file}}}{\i\f5\fs20 Header file: }{\f5\fs20 
A text file that names and describes the signals belonging to a given record.  Under MS-DOS, header files have names of the form }{\b\i\f5\fs20 record}{\b\f11\fs20 .hea}{\f5\fs20 , where }{\b\i\f5\fs20 record }{\f5\fs20 
is the record name;  different conventions are used under other operating systems.  See the }{\i\f5\fs20 ECG Database Applications Guide }{\f5\fs20 for further information about header files.}
\par \page {\cs15\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16 \f47\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #}{\lang1024  WFDB_annotation}}}{\i\f5\fs20 Annotation: }{\f5\fs20 
A label, associated with a particular sample (and optionally, a particular signal), that describes a feature of the signal(s) at that time. In ECG records, most annotations are beat (QRS) labels and indicate the QRS type (normal, PVC, SVPB, etc.).}
\par \page {\cs15\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16 \f47\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #}{\lang1024  WFDB_annotation_file}}}{\i\f5\fs20 Annotation file: }{\f5\fs20 A binary file that contains a time-ordered set of }{\f5\fs20\ul annotations}{\v WFDB_annotation}{
\f5\fs20  for some or all of the signals belonging to a given record.  Under MS-DOS, annotation files have names of the form }{\b\i\f5\fs20 record.ann}{\f5\fs20 , where }{\b\i\f5\fs20 record }{\f5\fs20 is the record name, and }{\b\i\f5\fs20 ann }{
\f5\fs20 is the annotator name;  different conventions are used under other operating systems.  See the }{\i\f5\fs20 ECG Database Applications Guide }{\f5\fs20 for further information about annotation files.}
\par \page {\cs15\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16 \f47\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #}{\lang1024  WFDB_signal_file}}}{\i\f5\fs20 Signal file: }{\f5\fs20 
A binary file that contains a time-ordered set of digitized samples of one or more signals belonging to a WFDB record.  A record may contain more than one signal file;  all signal files belonging to a given record are named in the record's }{\f5\fs20\ul 
header file}{\v WFDB_header_file}{\f5\fs20 .  There are no restrictions on signal file names other than those imposed by the operating system.  Commonly, signal files are given names of the form }{\b\i\f5\fs20 record}{\b\f11\fs20 .dat}{\f5\fs20 , where }{
\b\i\f5\fs20 record }{\f5\fs20 is the record name.}
\par \page {\cs15\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16 \f47\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #}{\lang1024  WFDB_record}}}{\i\f5\fs20 Record: }{\f5\fs20 A set of files that may include }{\f5\fs20\ul signal files}{\v WFDB_signal_file}{\f5\fs20 , }{\f5\fs20\ul annotation files}
{\v WFDB_annotation_file}{\f5\fs20 , and a }{\f5\fs20\ul header file}{\v WFDB_header_file}{\f5\fs20 
, all of which are associated with the same original signals.  Only the header file is mandatory.  Although records are sometimes called tapes for historical reasons, records are now more commonly maintained on optical or magnetic disks than on tape.}

\par \page {\cs15\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16 \f47\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #}{\lang1024  WFDB_record_name}}}{\i\f5\fs20 Record name: }{\f5\fs20 A string (of up to 8 characters) that identifies a WFDB }{\f5\fs20\ul record.}{\v WFDB_record}{\f5\fs20 
 Record names for the MIT-BIH Arrhythmia Database are 3-digit 
numbers beginning with 1 or 2 (e.g., 100, 203; not all such numbers are assigned as record names, however).  Record names for other databases follow different conventions.  To get a list of available records, find files matching the pattern }{\b\f11\fs20 
*.hea}{\f5\fs20  (in any of the directories named in the }{\f5\fs20\ul WFDB path}{\v WFDB_path}{\f5\fs20 );  the first part of the name (omitting the "}{\b\f11\fs20 .hea}{\f5\fs20 
" suffix) of each such file is the name of the record with which it is associated.
\par }}